Have you ever stood on the ocean shore enjoying the salt spray watching the breakers dash against the rocks or run up onto the sandy beach in them withdrawal?
Many enjoy spending hours at the ocean. We never stop marveling at its beauty and its immense size.
On the other hand, many fear the destructive power of the ocean.
Like other natural forces, the ocean can act like a powerful giant that sometimes goes on a rampage.
What can man do to stop the wall of water of a tsunami from approaching the coastline?
The power of storm waves is almost unbelievable. They have been known to throw boulders weighing 7,000 pounds over a wall 20 feet high.
Can we trust that Jehovah, in the future, will bring the ocean and other natural forces into perfect balance?
In the following video, note how the oceans give loud and clear evidence of Job's wisdom and power.
Millions of cubic meters of water circulates continually around our planet.
Near the poles, water that is colder, saltier and denser sinks, creating a flow almost 100 times that of the Amazon River.
This drives a massive circulation of water that may take 1,000 years to complete the global ocean conveyor belt.
This enormous system distributes heat which helps to stabilize the weather and transports great quantities of nutrients around the world.
So that life may flourish in abundance.
Jehovah set these mechanisms in motion and understands them perfectly.
You rule over the raging of the sea when its waves surge you come.
On our video, the oceans are essential to sustain life on the earth.
Sadly, however, greedy men have trashed them with pollution.
Global warming has caused ocean levels to rise, threatening coastal areas.
Experts are concerned that the natural forces are so out of balance that soon the planet will no longer sustain life.
Yet, friends, if Jehovah had the wisdom and power to create the earth's oceans, when his time comes to bring all natural forces back into perfect balance, he can certainly cause us to live in harmony with them.
Though the oceans might appear to be uncontrollable, we know that Jehovah is vastly more powerful.
Note how Psalm 93-4 describes his power.
Psalm 93-4.
Above the sound of many waters, mightier than the breaking waves of the sea, Jehovah is majestic in the heights.
Yes, the great sea may lift up its powerful waves to heaven, but it is no match for our majestic Almighty God.
Jehovah's powerful ability to perfectly control the oceans gives us great confidence that he is also perfectly capable of protecting us, his people.
In Jeremiah 5-22, notice how Jehovah reminds his people of his power.
Jeremiah 5-22.
Do you not fear me, Jehovah? Should you not tremble before me? It is I who place the sand as the boundary for the sea.
A permanent regulation that it cannot pass over, although its waves toss, they cannot prevail, although they roar, they still cannot pass beyond it.
Yes, Almighty God placed the sand as the boundary for the sea, so when its furious waves pound against sand, the sand absorbs their impact and the force vanishes.
Since Jehovah controls the literal roaring sea from going beyond his boundaries, can he not also protect his people when the wicked sea of humanity threatens us with his violent storms?
Jehovah's control over vast waters was well demonstrated when he protected the Israelites by allowing them to cross the Red Sea on dry land.
Now the Red Sea has an average depth of over 1,600 feet. It is estimated that at the point where the Israelites crossed it, the depth of the sea was as much as 50 feet.
Imagine being in an Israelite, walking through this corridor with walls of water on each side of you, some 50 feet high.
And then, Jehovah used those same walls of water to collapse, drowning their enemies, the Egyptians. Yes, Jehovah controlled those vast waters to deliver an entire nation from a world power.
And do you recall the account in Mark chapter 4 verses 37 to 39 when God empowered his son Jesus to control the sea and the wind?
When Jesus and the disciples were crossing the sea of Galilee in a boat, a great wind storm caused the sea to rage and it threatened to fill up their boat.
What did Jesus do? He commanded the wind and the sea with the words hush, be quiet and the raging wind and sea calm down.
So on this occasion, Jesus showed what He will do as King of God's kingdom during the millennium. He will control forces of nature. There will be no need to fear the ocean.
In recent years, disastrous storms are becoming more frequent and severe. What used to be considered extreme, massive floods, killer droughts and monsters, no storms is the new normal.
Many experts now put the blame on human activity that has affected the oceans and the climate.
So yes, men continue to ruin their today, but here's the good news.
During the millennium, by means of his kingdom, our wise creator will undo all the damage done by humans.
Everything will function in harmony with Jehovah's principles. And we will learn how to properly care for this beautiful planet.
And as we do, everything will be brought back into proper balance, including the climate and the oceans.
While some men today fear that the earth will be destroyed due to man's abuse, Jehovah gives us this comforting promise at Psalm 104 and verse 5.
Psalm 104 and verse 5.
He has established the earth on his foundations. It will not be moved from its place forever and ever.
Yes, the beautiful deep and dark blue ocean will roll on forever. The creator will make sure that by observing the oceans, meditating on what we see.
We can build our faith that soon we will enjoy Jehovah's creation forever without fear.
Brother James Mance, a helper to the writing committee, will now present the next talk of this symposium. Use creation to build your faith for us.